Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopes sent
to the I'm joined by Doctor Donald Johnson. He
is the Virginia M. Ullman Chair in Human Origins
and the school of in the School of Human
Evolution and Social Change and the founding director of
the Institute of Human Origins at Arizona State University.
He has conducted lots of field and laboratory research
in paleoanthropology, most notably, he discovered that the, the
3.18 million year old hominid skeleton, popularly known as
Lucy. And today we're going to talk about Lucy,
uh, Australopithecuernzis more generally and also homo habily. So,
Doctor Johnson, welcome to the show. It's a huge
pleasure to everyone.
Well, it's a pleasure for me to be on
your show. Thank you so much.
OK, so less remark than the 50th anniversary of
the discovery of Lucy and that's one of the
main reasons why I invited you on the show.
So, start by telling us, uh, first about the
history behind her discovery.
Well, uh, I was introduced to a, uh, geologist,
a French uh geologist in Paris, uh, in 1970.
Who unfortunately is no longer with us now. His
name is Maurice Taeb. And he was working uh
in the area you see behind me here, uh,
which is the Afar region of northeastern Ethiopia, which
is the largest expanse of the Great Rift Valley.
And uh he was mapping the area. He was
trying to understand the origins and evolution of the
geology in this area. And during the course of
his field work, uh, he brought my attention to
the fact that this area was filled with all
kinds of fossil remains of animals, elephants and rhinos,
and pigs, and, uh, antelopes and so on, and
no anthropologist, paleoanthropologist like myself, someone who studies human
origins, had ever visited that region. And he asked
me if I wanted to go with him. And
I was a young, uh, anthropologist at that time.
I had just gotten my doctorate, uh, from the
University of Chicago, I was getting my doctorate from
the University of Chicago. And I was in Ethiopia
with my, uh, professor from the University of Chicago,
working in the absolute opposite end of Ethiopia in
southern Ethiopia. So, I was, um, Just beginning my
career in human origins research and uh surprisingly, he,
he offered the opportunity uh for me to accompany
him there. And uh finally, after a couple of
years of uh organization and planning and uh finding
financing, we made a visit in 1972. Uh, I
was still 2 years away from getting my doctorate,
so I was just a graduate student. And I
was absolutely amazed at how. Filled this area was
with fossils. You could walk along and find a
complete elephant skull. It was more than 3 million
years old. We knew that they were very old
because we looked at the, the teeth and the,
especially, uh, and they're good indicators of time. They
evolve very quickly over time. And uh uh so
we decided to form an an expedition, a formal
expedition called the International AFA Research Expedition. And uh
to systematically work in this area, which was really
terra incognita for anthropologists. And uh in 1972, we,
we undertook this, um, you know, exploratory expedition, and
finally in 1973, we had uh arranged for funding.
And an organization of a number of people to
go and to sort of say, plant our flag
there. We, we got a permission from the Ministry
of Culture in Ethiopia, uh to go to this
particular place, which is called Hadar, H A D
A R. And uh I had not a great
deal of money. It was a, a really small
amount of money and the pressure was on because
I was hoping we could find the remains of
a human ancestor. And, and you can see there
are no signs that say dig here or look
here, uh, and uh I was very fortunate in
late October of 1973. Where I spotted a few
bone fragments on the ground that uh constituted part
of a human knee. And we could tell it
was from a human knee because of the anatomy.
And the anatomy told us that that knee worked
the same way that your knee and my knee
works. In other words, it was from a creature
that was walking upright. And, uh, within the world
of mammals, as you well know, uh, humans really
stand out because we get from here to there
by walking on two legs. All other mammals walk
on four legs. So we knew this was from
a human ancestor, and Maurice said, geologically, it looked
like it was from below a volcanic lava. That
eventually was dated at over 3 million years. We
now know that that knee was 3 is 3.4
million years. In in age. So all of a
sudden we had the proof we needed that these
beautiful deposits behind me contained remains of humans. We
didn't know who that human was. We didn't know
it it got the name Australopithecus, eventually, which, as
you said in your introduction, and named after the
Aar region called Afaensis. But uh at the time,
all we knew was it came from a creature
that walked upright, and that For the very first
time, was the proof we needed that this huge
geological region contained fossils of our human ancestors, not
just all kinds of mammals, but also those that
were an ancestor to later humans. And that was
what really launched uh our expeditions to this arena.
And why were or even are still Lucy's fossil
remains so important.
Well, Lucy, uh, we have to, you know, we
have to look back a little bit, uh, to
understand that, uh, in terms of what what we
knew at the time of her discovery. She was
discovered the following year in 1973. Uh, WHEN I
was out with one of my graduate students, and
I happened to Look on the ground, I'm always
looking at the ground and uh spotted a little
piece of uh of elbow. Hm. And uh it
was just a small fragment, and I, I thought
this is not a monkey, this is not an
antelope, this has to be from a human ancestor,
but it's so tiny. Well, I then thought the
knee was very small. Are all these pygmies or
small people or what, what are they? And um
at that time, in the early 70s. In terms
of our understanding of human origins, everyone placed uh
the South African fossils, Australopithecus africanus, at the base
of the human family tree that gave rise to
everything from Homo habilis, uh, to robustus and Boisea,
and so on. And uh this discovery of Lucy
was going to be very critical in more closely
examining that hypothesis, because Lucy was 40% complete. It
wasn't just a fragment of jaw. Uh, WE now
knew that from the teeth, it belonged into the
genus Australopithecus. Uh, WE didn't know until 4 years
later, or announced till 4 years later. That she
represented a and she and the other fossils frompa
represented a new kind of human ancestry, more primitive,
but walking upright, very small brain. That was a
much better candidate for the common ancestor. So, uh,
she. Really Caused us to reexamine the shape, the
geometry of the human family tree. And remove Africanus
from a common ancestor to all the later branches.
And uh she led us to uh other fossils
at the site, which indicated to us that this
was an early human species. We now know one
that lived close to a million years in eastern
Africa, you know, you and I as Homo sapiens,
and maybe we've been around for 200, 250,000 years.
And that her species lived in Kenya, Tanzania, uh,
Ethiopia, and probably also in North Central Africa in
Chad. So it was a very widespread species, geographically
widespread, and it lasted a long time. Which meant
that it was highly adaptable, that it could adapt
to different kinds of environments. And also, we learned
that the small individuals like Lucy, And like the
need. Uh, WERE from females. Uh, AND the males
are much larger, that there was a large degree
of what we call sexual dimorphism that males were
much larger, females much smaller. So this unleashed decades
of uh re-examination of the earliest stages of uh
our our origins. And Lucy has continued to be
at the focal point. Of this research. Uh, WHENEVER
someone thinks about early humans, uh, and they pick
up their newspaper, I don't know what your local
newspaper is, but, um, and a new discovery is
made, uh, in, in Africa, they always say, oh,
it's older than Lucy, or younger than Lucy, or
the same as Lucy, or different than Lucy. So,
Lucy continues to be that important comparison, comparison to
everything that is discovered. So she has become the
benchmark by which all other discoveries are compared and
evaluated. And uh it seems that uh Very frequently,
there are people who who find new aspects about
Lucy. For example, there's been recent research on the
size of her brain, which was really quite small,
but the size of a good size orange. You
know, our brains are 3 or 4 times as
large as her brain. And um it it we've
been able to reconstruct those using technology in virtual
space to determine size of brain in bluey species.
And it has shown us that uh already there
seems to be some natural selection for somewhat of
an increase in brain size. So, she, uh, and
all of her other, we have more than 500
specimens of her species now. So we have a
good understanding of her biology, and uh she continues
to be the real focal point of paleoanthropological research
in this time period.
And what do we know about Australopithecus afarens? You
mentioned, for example, the places where these species lived
in Africa, uh, but what other information do we
know about it in terms of, for example, anatomy
and sociality? I mean, what other things do we
know about it?
Well, um, from, uh, there's, there's controversy about many
of these topics, but, uh, we have not found
any stone tools, uh, in association with any of
the human fossils at Hawor. Uh, I think that
her species, uh, was not fashioning stone tools like
later species like Homo habilits, but we do know
from uh discoveries at one fossil locality. Uh, WHICH
is called the first family. There are remains of
250 fragments of bones, including parts of skulls, uh,
a child's skull or baby skull, who died probably
around 3 years old, and so on, that there
are large specimens and small specimens, and there are
young specimens, and there are old specimens in this
one geological layer, which means that they were certainly
living in groups. Uh, LIKE modern chimpanzees, and I
think when you are a biped like this, uh,
and, uh, particularly in the case of females, Uh,
you need this protection of living in a group.
So they were living in a group. Uh, WE
don't know exactly why this group died and was
buried in this geological layer, but I suspect that
they, their group size was not dissimilar, or may
have been very similar to what we see in
in chimpanzees, maybe 30, 40 individuals. So, uh, and
we know that uh there is some extension of,
of uh childhood, that they, uh, their brains continued
to grow. For a number of years after birth.
Uh, AND, uh, it means that there probably was
some particular care given to these offspring. They had
more to learn about their world, let's say, than
a, than an average chimpanzee. Uh, WE know that,
uh, from, uh, studies of isotopes. That uh they
were um. Essentially vegetarians. Uh, WE know that, uh,
they didn't just survive on vegetarians, because at the,
the, the particular locality where Lucy was found, uh,
it's interesting, uh, during our excavations, we found a
number of things that were surprising. We found uh
crocodile eggs. Uh, WHICH are more or less the
shape of the eggs we have in our refrigerators,
and we found round eggs, uh, which are turtle
eggs. Uh AND uh what that suggested to us,
uh, was that Lucy had actually been buried in
a beach sand. Uh, IN the old, in the
ancient lake that was there, and perhaps she was
down at the edge of this lake, not only
to get a drink, uh, humans have to drink
every day, primates drink every day. And uh. But
she may have been collecting turtle eggs or crocodile
eggs, uh, and including them in in her diet.
She probably was climbing trees to eat and collect
birds' eggs and small vertebrates, uh, and, uh, I
remember very vividly, one of our students on the
trip, uh, brought a a strange looking thing to
me. Looked like an enormous canine, and upon further
examination, we realized it was a a claw of
a crab. So maybe they enjoyed a nice crab
dinner from time to time. Uh, BUT predominantly, uh,
the trace elements and the environment in which they
live suggests and the and the wear on their
teeth suggests that they were essentially vegetarians, but they
certainly uh could have eaten um turtle eggs, crocodile
eggs, and so on. And in a documentary I
did uh in the early 1990s. Uh, IF you've
seen that, uh, I, uh, reconstruct had reconstructed Lucy
using a, a, a, a twig or a blade
of grass, taking termites like chimpanzees and eating the
termites, which are a great source of protein, amino
acids, and so on. So, uh, I, no one
ever had thought about that before, but of course
if chimpanzees do it, why couldn't, uh, Australopithecus have
done this. So, uh, they were living in troops.
They probably weren't very dense on the landscape. There
weren't a huge number of them on the landscape.
They were not big herd animals like the antelopes
and gazelles. Uh, SO they, they did live near
a lake, a permanent source of water. And I
suspect uh that in many ways, uh they were
very similar to uh chimpanzees and their behavior. Uh,
BUT they were beginning to Probably move in a
different direction in terms of social interaction with one
another. We don't know for certain, um, we know
they were lived in multi-male and multi-female groups. Uh,
AND we would love to know more, but, uh,
there are no, there are no signs of burials,
there are no signs of elaborate tool making, so
that, um, they were still, from our perspective, you
know, walking around with things like this, uh, quite
different. And technologically nowhere as uh close to us
in terms of their uh cultural artifacts.
And what do we know about uh its phylogenetic
relationships? I mean, in terms of ominent species, what
were, or what are its closest relatives and how
does it relate to the homogenus?
Well, this is, this is a, a very exciting
time, uh, in paleoanthropology. Uh, YOU know, the 1970s
in my first book, uh, called the, uh, the
Golden Decade, you know, when my colleagues like Richard
Leakey and uh his mother Mary Leakey were working
in Tanzania and in Kenya, finding fossil footprints of
Lucy's species in Tanzania. Uh, THE late Richard Leakey
finding a new species, and, uh, some more complete
specimens of the early genus Homo, uh, up at
Lake Rudolph, Lake Turana, as it's called now. And,
uh, there has been an increase in the number
of specimens of various species, but today, One of
the, when, when I was asked uh uh during
the 80s and and 90s, what, what I thought
was perhaps one of the most exciting aspects was
what is the relationship between Ahoensis and our own
genus Homo. Uh, SO your question is, is was
a question that all of us had for many
years. And um we hypothesized, my colleagues and I
hypothesized that Lucy was a common ancestor to one
branch that led to our own genus, and led
also to other Australopithecus species. But the problem was
it was a million years separating Lucy from the
genus Homo. And uh what was happening in that
period? Well, scientists, I just spoke with one yesterday,
Kay Reed, who was at the Institute of Human
Origins Emeritus now. But her team Uh, has found
a a lower jaw. Uh, THAT is, uh. About
2.8 million Lucy's species went extinct about 3 million
years ago. So this is not long after Lucy's
species vanished, and in the front of the jaw,
you have a very angled chin. Uh, IN the
back of the jaw, you have a very homo
arrangement of the teeth and jaws. So this appears
to be A descendant of Lucy, but it's placed
in the genus Homo. And uh it means that
uh there is a anatomical morphological connection between Lucy
species oferensis and early Homo. And in the mid
80s, uh a skull was found uh at Lake
Turkana by uh Richard Leakey's team. Uh, THAT was
an Australopithecus, but it was a peculiar Australopithecus. It,
it was called the black skull. It had a
very strong crest on the top of its skull,
but it had a very projecting face and enormous
teeth. Luy species did not have huge crushing and
grinding teeth. So this specimen known as the black
skull, or 17,000 is its Catalog number had a
projecting face like Lucy. But Massive muscles for mastication
for chewing and enormous crushing and grinding teeth, and
it was at 2.5 million years, so it was
halfway between the disappearance of Lucy's species and the
appearance of something we call nutcracker man, the skull
that was found in 1959 at Oldvai Gorge by
Mary Leakey, which was this robust Australopithecus called Australopithecus
Boisea. So now we have a few connections. Between
Lucy and later species of Homo, and later species
of Australopithecus. So, uh, this is uh uh an
interesting hypothesis that we're working with right now. And
uh so that was one of the real focal
points one of the real questions, you know, reporters
would always say, what are the remaining questions? I
said, well, there are, there, there are many questions
that I won't remaining questions that I won't bore
you with, but the two major areas is where
did our genus come from? Homo Which ultimately led
through some superorous route through phylogenetic changes to us,
Homo sapiens. And uh what was the ancestor to
uh Lucy's species? BECAUSE Lucy was the only species
we had at that time between 3 and 4
million years. And it also seemed to me that
it was very strange that there were not other
species. So if we shift forward to today, Uh,
Richard Leakey's wife, Meeve Leakey, working south of Lake
Turkana, found uh a series of jaws and teeth.
Uh, THAT are clearly Australopithecus, and to evaluate those
and to put them in perspective, or put a
forensis in perspective relative to them, they all came
to, uh, uh, M came with some of her
colleagues to my lab in Arizona, brought casts of
everything. And we uh wrote a, a very important
paper which showed that her fossils, which she called
Australopithecus animensis, was an immediate precursor to Aerensis. It
was Afareis, but even more primitive, had a very
strong buttressing in the midline here. Uh, IT had
very straight tooth rows like you have in apes,
much straighter than what we see in our arns.
And uh so this, this was suggested to be
a common ancestor or an ancestor to Lucy's species.
So, uh, most recently, uh, a team working in
the middle Awash area of Ethiopia found something. That
is still uh under consideration by many people, because
we don't know uh if it really were really,
if it really was an ancestor to Animensis. And
this was something called Ardipithecus ramidus. And it is
um a strange creature in many ways. It, it
appears to be the beginnings of bipedalism. Uh, THERE
are suggestions in the pelvis, but when you examine
the foot, it has a foot like that. It's
a grasping foot. For climbing, not necessarily adapted like
our foot, if we look, take our socks off
and look at our feet, our big toe is
in line with the rest of the foot, and
all these toes are shortened. So our foot is
not a grasping foot, but a way of helping
us move forward. And uh it's got very long
arms that come down uh below the knee, so,
uh, it was probably living a great deal in
the trees. Uh, AND, uh, there are not many
specimens well known of it. It's about 4.4 million
years in age. Animensis uh goes back now very
close to 4.3 million years. So is that enough
time to evolve from a very ape-like creature to
uh a creature that is more human-like? That's one
of the big questions. And my colleague at the
Institute of Human Origins, uh, Who is now director,
uh, I'm very uh happy that we got him
as a director. I'm, uh, will be retiring very
shortly from university, but I stepped down as a
director, and, uh, this is a, uh, fantastic, very
accomplished, uh, Ethiopian uh scholar named Johannes Haile Selassie.
He is, uh, he actually found the first bone
of Ardi Pitaggus Rainus. And um he is working
in an area uh that I've known about since
the early 70s, um, northeast of where Lucy was
found, and uh he's finding uh one or two,
maybe three different species at about the same time
as Lucy. And the big question is why was
there such diversity there and now no diversity at
Hat art. Uh, AND he found, he found a
foot, a partial foot that shows that divergence. To
that is contemporary with Lucy. Does that mean that
that was the Ardipithecus was a separate, independent lineage,
it lasted a long time, or was this just
parallel to it having given rise to Australopithecus? So
there, there are a lot of new questions being
asked, and uh talking to my colleague Kay yesterday,
they found some new things uh at about 2.8
million. Uh, THAT support the idea that perhaps, uh,
there are more specimens of the genus Homo. It
has not been put into a species yet because
there's not enough diagnostic material. But uh they find
stone tools. At 2.6 million years, uh, hoping to
find them a little bit older. Uh, SO we're,
we're, we're looking at an exciting time in paleoanthropology,
when we're beginning to look at that very opaque
period of time between, say, 2.9 million and 2.5
million. And uh there are uh numerous uh scholars
uh working on this problem. And there's been a
major development in Ethiopia. Uh, WE had a huge
conference last summer to celebrate the 50th anniversary of
uh Lucy's discovery. I can't believe that. I was
31 when I found that, today I'm 81, but
um I remember as if it was yesterday, and
at that conference, what was so amazing, if I
went to a conference like I did in Africa
in the early 1970s. There there were no African
scholars in the audience. Uh, AND, uh, just like
in, uh, in the United States, uh, we wouldn't
want all of these excavations of, uh, you know,
Native American sites and so on being conducted by
foreign scholars. We'd like to be participating in that
work. It's only natural. And over those many years,
there have been efforts, uh, not just by me
and my institute, the Institute of Human Origins. But
by many other scholars to train uh African scholars.
And this has been particularly uh notable in Ethiopia,
where there are uh Ethiopians, a number of Ethiopians
who are undertaking their own expeditions and making their
own discoveries. And making their own breakthroughs. Uh, Johannes
is a is a prime example of that. At
the University of Chicago is a a close friend
of mine who did his postdoctoral work at the
Institute of Human Origins. His name is Zaa Alamseed.
And uh he was born and raised in uh
in Ethiopia. And uh he developed a real interest
in uh human evolution. And uh made a discovery
of a partial child skeleton, which is uh which
is 3.4 million years, 3.3 million years old, a
little bit older than Lucy, but the kind of
baby that Lucy would have had. So he's now
trying to understand how does a baby offers grow
up to an adult offererances? Is it slow? Is
it fast? Is it delayed, and so on. So,
um, there are, and the Ethiopian government, the Ministry
of Culture in particular, uh, I met, uh, members
of the ministry when I was there in August
to give a, a very important paper, uh, to
open this big conference celebrating Lucy, and there are,
there are laboratories. Uh, THERE'S a major building that's
been built to invite scholars from around the world
to come and study these fossils. So, uh, as
we look back, uh, as it takes a long
time to study and understand and interpret these fossils,
it, you know, I always, I have an expression
in that I use in my life that the
road to success is always under construction. No matter
how hard you try, there's something happens. And uh
it took a long time for this to happen
in Ethiopia. It took almost 50 years. But now
there are Ethiopian scholars who are doing cutting edge
research, are as qualified as any researcher in the
world. Uh, AS opposed to when I first began
in Ethiopia in 1970, uh, there were no laboratories,
there was no real place to store these fossils.
There was no place to study them. There, there
were, there were these fossils were taken abroad to
be discovered, but everything has been returned to Ethiopia.
It's all housed in the National Museum in Addis
Ababa. So, we're seeing the results of uh years
of study of the fossils, and years of efforts
to to bring African scholars into the research arena
so that they themselves can organize their own teams,
raise their own funds, make their own discoveries, and
interpret the fossils that they themselves and their teams
have discovered. So, Lucy was not only important for
our understanding of human origins, not only important as
a benchmark. If uh it seems that no matter
where I go, if I'm getting my by going
to my doctor, for example, and the doctor will
say, well, now your name sounds very familiar to
me. What, what, what do you do? And I
said, Well, I'm an anthropologist. And he said, well,
what kind of anthropologist? I say, I know Lucy,
you know, she brought it all to the public.
She brought human origins, the subject of human origins
to a worldwide audience. And thirdly, these early discoveries
uh stimulated uh all of us, as well as
the Ethiopian government to see how important it was
to develop this research in Ethiopia itself with Ethiopian
scholars. So, um, there is, there are people who
have just come back from the field. Johannes just
came back from the field. I haven't spoken to
him as to what he and his team have
discovered. But, uh, certainly there, there are going to
be many more discoveries made in Ethiopia to help
us understand that transition from, uh, for instance, to
Homo, and from Homo, whatever it is, we don't
have a name for that earlier species yet, uh,
to the emergence of things like Homo habilis and
so on.
OK, so let's talk then now about Homo habilis.
Uh, YOU have also done some work on it
on this species. What do we know about it
and its phylogenetic relationships?
Homo habilis, it probably goes back to about 2.4
million years, 2.3 million years. Uh, WE found, uh,
at the site of Hadar, uh, a complete, fairly
complete upper jaw. Which is completely different from an
Australopithecus jaw. It has a very high dome to
the top of the mouth. There's a palate, for
example, uh, the teeth are very different, uh, the
shape of the front of the nose is very
different. So it belongs in the genus Homo. Uh,
WE'VE been reluctant to put it into a species,
but there are aspects that are similar to Homo
habilis. It was originally named in 1964. With discoveries
at Olduvai Gorge in Tanzania by uh Louis Leakey
and uh Philip Tobias and John Napier. Uh, AND,
uh, It is, uh, it, it has a larger
brain size, um, it's probably, you know, A few
100 cubic centimeters larger than what we're seeing in
Australopithecus, maybe as much as uh twice the size
of Australopithecus, uh, associated with stone tools. Uh, ASSOCIATED
with butchered bones. Uh, CONTROVERSY as to whether or
not they were really doing much hunting or just
scavenging, but they were now including a significant amount
of meat in their diet. And uh meat is
very important because it is a high energy food.
And as opposed to um predominantly being a vegetarian.
We think that real hunting, that is having a
strategy to go out and hunt and kill an
animal, uh, really only traced back to about 1.5
million years in things like homo or gastro, that
Homo habilis was, uh, probably more of a scavenger.
But it was making regular tools, which are called
Ooin tools after old divide. And those old one
tools can now be traced back to about 2.6
million years. So they were making uh stone tools
for quite a long time. We don't have any
cranial material from this 2.3 to 3 million year
time period, so we don't know what their faces
looked like, how large their brains were, how their
bodies were built, and so on. But uh and
what is interesting about Homo habilis is that. The
one specimen that uh a team I led to
Tanzania found. Uh, IN the, in the 80s. Uh,
WHICH is called Olvi hominid 65. Uh, IS that
it's got, um, Relatively long arms like you see
in. Australopius. So that ties Homo there again to
Australopithecus. And um so there's a big discussion as
to whether there is only one or more species
than Homo habits living in contemporaneously. Uh, AND the
suggestion is that, uh, the hypothesis right now is
that to havelis did give rise to the African,
uh, Homo erectus, which is called the Homo ergaster.
Uh, AND, uh, in Homo orgaster, the Turkana boy
found at Lake Turkana is a fairly, it's so
wonderfully complete specimen. I just saw it, uh. A
couple of months ago when I was in Nairobi.
And I've, I've seen it over the years, but
it's, it's, it has a body like us. It
has a long, narrow body. It has a very
long legs, relatively short arms, it has a larger
cranial capacity, close to 1200 cubic centimeters, almost 3
times the size of Lucy's. Uh, AND is associated
with stone tools and butchered animals. So Homo habilis,
uh, as always seems to be going undergoing some
sort of revision. There's this specimen along. In Homo
habilis or should it be in homogaster and uh.
We do need further materials to see if there
were multiple species living at that at that early
time. But uh once we began to include meat
in our diet, Um, it, it was very important
for the development of, uh, Our most important organ,
which is our brain. Uh, OUR brains are, are
one of the hungriest parts of our body. We
use a lot of calories. And um you, if
you look at vegetarians, Uh, within mammals. Generally, uh,
and I'm not talking about humans, uh, my wife
is a vegetarian, but, uh, But uh uh animals
that are vegetarians, they're not very Intelligent, they're not
very bright. Um, YOU know, they, it, it doesn't
take a lot of intelligence. To for for herbivores.
To run down bushes or grass, right? It's just
there. But they have to eat all the time.
They're eating all day long. You go out, I,
I was out yesterday and there were a bunch
of sheep, uh, nearby, and, uh, you know, they're
out there to cut the grass down, and they're
just eating all day. Um, BUT her but carnivores
on the other hand, whether it's your family cat,
uh or uh a coyote, which we have in
California, uh, and Arizona. Um, THEY, they're, they, they're
brighter animals because they have to strategize, and it
takes more brain cells to do that, to hunt
down and kill their animals. And uh I think
that as our earliest ancestors were tied so closely
to the African, a common ancestor with the African
apes, that they were vegetarians, there were dietary restrictions
on feeding a brain. But once you had a
high energy food source on a regular basis, like.
Uh, ANIMAL meat. Uh, THERE was natural selection for
larger brains. I mean, larger brains, better tools, better
tools, more meat, larger brains in that feedback circle.
So, uh, meat eating became very, very important, uh,
after, uh, 2 million years ago, and, uh, certainly
is evident in the bones we find. Associated with
Homo habits. For example, uh, at Olduvai, uh, have
you been to Africa?
Uh, NO, not yet.
OK. Well, when you go to Olduvai, as I
hope you will someday, uh, you will see that
the animal bones, the antelope bones and hippo bones
and whatever, are all broken up. You know, they're
smashed, and if you look closely, you can see
cut marks on them. So those cut marks were
made by stone tools, which were obviously in the
hand of Homo habilits probably. Uh, DID Australopithecus Boisia
use stone tools? I don't think so, but We'll
see. And um so they were uh beginning to
scavenge carnivore kills. And if you, uh, as I've
uh seen uh animal kills in Africa many times.
Uh, EVEN the hyenas can't get into some of
these bones that have a very thick, uh, cortex
to them. But if you've got a, a, a,
a hammer stone. And small flakes to disarticulate the
skeleton and run away with a leg or whatever,
and you smash these bones and you open them,
there's bone marrow inside. And that was a meat,
it was a source of protein and energy that
uh even other animals couldn't. Get to Uh, but
early humans could. And, uh, meat, once meat comes
into the diet, I think we largely move in
a very different direction to a much more sophisticated
uh groups living together, more sophisticated technology, um, and,
uh, of course, uh, when we look around the
world today, uh, we were hunter gatherers until Well,
1214 1000 years ago, very good hunter gatherers worldwide.
Uh, EVERYBODY was a hunter gatherer or a hunter
fisher or fisher gatherer or whatever. But once agriculture
came in and gave us even more leisure time,
Uh, our cultural innovations just rose asymptotically, uh, just
in my lifetime of 50 years, when I think
back to, you know, typing my doctoral dissertation on
an old typewriter, um, and today I have this
wonderful computer in front of me. Uh, SO, culturally,
we're evolving very, very quickly. Um, SO, uh, the
innovations, early innovations that were made, uh, set the
stage for advancements, and I think that the inclusion
of, of even scavenged meat, uh, had a very
important impact on uh our evolutionary trajectory.
Mhm. So, let me just ask you one final
question because we've already done around 50 50 minutes.
Do we know which was the first species of
the Homo genus? I mean, we have Homoaboles, you
mentioned Homo ergaster. We also have Homo erectus. I
mean, was any of these species the first one
of the homogeneus or not?
Well, I, I, I think, uh, I think that
the, the mandible I mentioned at 2.8 million. Uh,
IS, uh, Really almost half a million years older
than Habilis. And uh I would suspect it was
a different species, but we, we don't have enough
of it to conclusively show that it's that different
from Homo habits. So we have to, we have
to get we have to get more material, um,
but I, I, I would go as far as
to say. That the earliest homo. WAS A descendant
of Lucy's species of forensis. And That as far
as we know, this was an event. That happened
in eastern Africa. And We are beginning to understand
much more completely. Uh, THE, uh, a very important
boundary. In our evolutionary record. That before 3 million
years, we have only Australopithecus. After 3 million years.
More recently, we have Australopithecus and Homo. So Homo
arrived around 3 million years ago, was my estimate.
And that uh Why did Afarensis disappear? Why were
there new species of Australopithecus, and why did Homo
appear around 3 million years? Well, what we know
is that there was a significant climate change around
3 million years. And that climate change. Uh, Generally
speaking, was a period when there was a drier
period. And uh many of the more forested areas
were beginning to disappear. And more open areas. I
don't wanna say, you know, grasslands, woodlands, uh, began
to appear. And We also interestingly see. That there
were uh there was a uh explosion in the
diversity of herbivores. Uh, BIG herd herbivores like antelopes
and gazelles that came in from Asia. And uh
a diversity of some primates like baboons, which were
essentially herbivores and perhaps grass eaters. Uh, IN some
instances are seed eaters. And um. There was a
there was a period of competition for for those
vegetarian food sources. And some of them specialized in
strict vegetarianism, like robustus or Boise I or Nutcracker
man, that that group of robust Australopithecus, but they
made the evolutionary mistake. That so many species do.
They don't know where they're evolving to. They became
so specialized that when uh they had competition from
herd animals like gazelles and antelopes and baboons, um,
They lost out Because they were just outnumbered, and
they had less uh availability for the vegetarian diets
that they had developed. The other lineage that evolved
into homo. That we get the earliest tools at
2.6 million years, and there are supposedly tools at
3 and 3.3 and these large tools at at
Olduva or at uh Lake Jacana, but they're not
Oduin tools, they're just bashing tools. Uh, THERE are
cut marks on one bone from afarensis layer, but
there are no tools nearby. Were those really made
by purposeful stone tools or? Were they made by
some other agency we don't know. But uh once
tools came into the record, it, it changed significantly.
Um, THE availability of certain kinds of food. Um,
WHICH, uh, I think early homo was beginning to
exploit. And uh when you, uh, as I said,
when once you, if you go to all the,
all the bones are broken up because they're getting
marrow and meat and so on. And I think
this begins uh fairly early, around just after Lucy's
disappearance. And uh if that's the case, um, It
means that there was a really different behavioral change,
a very significant behavioral change, that was ultimately influenced
by competition for food sources, which was brought about
by changes in the environment. So, uh, I am
eager to see a team find more complete homo,
uh, at 2.5 to 3 million, to see what
that creature looks like, uh, to see if it
retains a lot of our creatures. What changed first,
uh, we know with the robust Australopithecus that the
first thing that changed were the sizes of teeth.
And the huge chewing muscles, and only later did
the faces become flat. So we're beginning to understand
the sequence, and it's very important to understand not
only uh the tempo, the speed of evolutionary change,
but the the kind of evolutionary change. And that
is where I think the field will be the
fieldwork will be so vitally important to help us
understand the emergence of Homo and its uh diversity.
Uh, SINCE you mentioned that, uh, as a last
question, let me just ask you then, apart from
what you mentioned there, what would be other questions
about the ominent evolution that you would like to
see answered in the near future?
Well, I think, uh, uh, one of them is
uh very specifically where Johannes is working with 2
or 3 species, uh, between 3 and 4 million
years. Uh, WHY are there so many species there?
And in Hadar there was only 1 species of
Australopithecus. That's one. Crucial question. Um, THE other crucial
question is, um, What is the relationship of Ardipithecus
to later humans? And, uh, you know, once you
get back over 4 million years, uh, I think
we're going to find some surprises that there may
be different species there. Uh, AND, uh, so I
think we're still focused on, um, species diversity, different
adaptations, uh, and, uh, ancestor descendant relationships between these
early Pleo Pleistocene hominids. Mhm.
Great. So let's leave it there, Doctor Johanson. Thank
you so much for taking the time to come
on the show. It's been an honor to talk
with you.
Well, you're very welcome. Um, I have never visited
your wonderful country. My wife and I are certainly
going to come and visit someday.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Matri Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Nes calling in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnseroro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Lays and the Samuel Corriere,
Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David
Sloan Wilson, Asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego Londono Correa.
Yannick Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevskynalebaa medicine,
Gary Galman Samov Zaledrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price,
Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franca Bartolotti Gabrielon
Scorteus Slelisky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John
Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai
Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, the
Augusta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez,
Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, Old
Heringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassy Zigoren,
Jeff McMahon, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas
Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert,
Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George
Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert,
Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner,
Ursula Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike
Levine, and Jos Net. A special thanks to my
producers. These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom
Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedict Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and
Nick Golden, and to my executive producers Matthew Lavender,
Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for
all.